Configurable Security for Internal Kafka Cluster Communication (#227)
strimzi/proposals: 145-configurable-security-of-internal-communication.md

  To support Service Account-based authentication, we will add our own custom Jetty handler to verify the Service Account tokens similarly to how the Kafka nodes do.

The Kafka Agent client inside the Cluster Operator will also be extended to support both TLS encryption and mTLS authentication as well as Service Account-based authentication.
It will use the token obtained through the `TokenRequest` API similarly to how the Cluster Operator does when connecting to Kafka.

#### Cruise Control Authentication

Cruise Control will use the Service Account tokens when connecting to the Kafka cluster to collect its metrics.
However, it uses its own API key-based authentication for its HTTP interface.
This will remain unchanged for the time being, and the new cluster configuration will only be used to enable or disable TLS encryption.

In the long term, we should aim to add support for Service Account-based authentication to the Cruise Control HTTP interface as well.
That would also help improve some of the limitations of the current authentication model, such as lack of credential rotation.
However, the Cruise Control community currently seems dysfunctional.

> This should be revisited later depending on the future of Cruise Control.

Reviewer: Should we instead of providing the option to disable or enable the TLS encryption, have it enabled and keep it enabled for the time being, and only when it could be improved on CC side, we can implement the same thing here? I mean, maybe it's completely stupid question, but I'm thinking about the case when the behavior can be weird for someone in case that for most parts we will use SA Auth and CC will not use it.
Also, how it would be disabled? In case that the annotation will not contain the `strimzi-tls` and `strimzi-mtls`?

Author: Sorry, not sure I follow the comment. It will not be weirder than today when everything used mTLS but Cruise Control HTTP interface uses its own API keys. So I do not think this changes anything in that respect.

Reviewer: Maybe I just misread it. I thought that with this proposal there will be option to just enable/disable the TLS encryption. That's why I said that "should we just keep it as is until we know the future of CC and we are able to do anything there".

Author: Cruise Control has two different types of connections:
* The Kafka connections is today using TLS/mTLS and would follow the same logic as almost everything else in the proposal. You would be able to enable/disable TLS and choose the authentication (mTLS or Service Accounts). There is no problem with that.
* The second interface is the HTTP interface. That uses Cruise Control's custom API keys for authentication. Not mTLS. So the extent to which proposal applies to this interface will be limited. You would be able to disable / enable TLS. But the authentication will remain as the CC's API keys. Making it possible to disable TLS is important, because it allows for example Istio integration.

I tried to make it more clear in the proposal.

Reviewer: Ah okay, thanks for the changes :) sorry for stupid questions.

This would need to be done not just for internal communication but for the whole Kafka cluster, including communication with regular Kafka clients.
It would significantly compromise the security of the Kafka cluster.

That is why this proposal has to deal with both the encryption and authentication layers.
To provide acceptable security, it needs to allow disabling TLS encryption and provide an alternative authentication mechanism that does not rely on TLS encryption.

NOTE:
_This proposal does not aim to supersede the SEP-100 proposal._
_Instead, it aims to complement it by making TLS encryption and mTLS authentication optional and providing alternatives._

## Proposal

This proposal focuses on two tasks:
* Allowing users to disable TLS encryption for internal communication
* Providing an alternative authentication mechanism

The proposed alternative authentication mechanism is based on Kubernetes Service Accounts and their tokens.
The Service Account tokens can be used in an OAuth-like fashion and are supported by Apache Kafka's `OAUTHBEARER` SASL mechanism.
They work on most Kubernetes clusters without requiring additional dependencies such as Keycloak.

> While the main purpose of Service Account-based authentication is to provide an alternative authentication mechanism when TLS encryption is disabled, users can also use it with TLS encryption enabled.

Reviewer 2: So does it mean that the proposal allows to keep TLS encryption but disable mTLS? Did I lost it across the proposal or it should be clarified?

Author: Yes, that is exactly what the sentence says. We have the options and making it possible in the code would be trivial, I do not see why would we enforce it. The motivation for that might be for example to use short-lived credentials (SA tokens) for authentication rather than long-lived certificates.

Could you please clarify what do you consider unclear on this? What and where should be clarified? I'm not really sure about is as the sentence says exactly what you ask about. Thanks.

Reviewer 2: I am not a native English speaker but a straight forward sentence like the following would have been simpler:

> The Service Account-based authentication can be used when TLS is disabled or not.

Anyway I can live with yours, I got the meaning.

Author: Ok, thanks for the explanation. I tried to reword it to make it more clear.

* Update the desired security configuration in the `Kafka` CR annotation (later in the `.spec` section)
* Edit the `.status` section of the `Kafka` CR and remove the current security configuration from it (see next section for more details)
* Unpause the reconciliation of the `Kafka` CR

Once the reconciliation is unpaused, the Strimzi Cluster Operator will recreate all Pods with the new configuration.

### Protecting the Running Clusters

Changing the security configuration for an existing cluster could easily break the cluster.
Therefore, we will have built-in protection to prevent that.
The current security configuration will be tracked in the `Kafka` CR status.
At the start of every reconciliation, Strimzi will compare the current and desired configuration.
If the desired configuration contains invalid changes, Strimzi will reject it, and fail the reconciliation without applying any changes to the actual Kafka cluster.
The user will be required to either revert the changes or to follow the correct procedure.

When the current status is not present, the operator will accept the desired configuration and use it.
This should happen only for:

> * Newly deployed clusters

Reviewer 2: How are you detecting newly created cluster? I remember that in the past having such distinction was not accepted because of the idempotency the operator should have.

Author: There is no special detection of new clusters. New clusters do not have any status set with the current security settings. So they would automatically accept whatever security settings the user uses. I tried to make it more clear in the proposal.

Reviewer 2: I am trying to understand what happens at reconciliation level. Is the operator detecting that the status is empty so it's a newly deployed cluster or not?

Author: Yes. The reconciliation will:
* Construct the desired configuration from the annotation (or use the current defaults if the annotation is missing)
* Check if the current configuration is stored in the `.status`
* If the current configuration is missing (for a new cluster or for a cluster where the user removed it manually as part of the _migration_), the desired changes will be used
* If the current configuration is present, it will compare the desired and current configurations and:
    * Fail the reconciliation if they differ (=> someone changed the configuration for an existing cluster)
    * Proceed wih the reconciliation if they match

I tried to make it more clear in the proposal

Reviewer 2: Perfect, thanks!

It would significantly compromise the security of the Kafka cluster.

That is why this proposal has to deal with both the encryption and authentication layers.
To provide acceptable security, it needs to allow disabling TLS encryption and provide an alternative authentication mechanism that does not rely on TLS encryption.

NOTE:
_This proposal does not aim to supersede the SEP-100 proposal._
_Instead, it aims to complement it by making TLS encryption and mTLS authentication optional and providing alternatives._

## Proposal

This proposal focuses on two tasks:
* Allowing users to disable TLS encryption for internal communication
* Providing an alternative authentication mechanism

The proposed alternative authentication mechanism is based on Kubernetes Service Accounts and their tokens.
The Service Account tokens can be used in an OAuth-like fashion and are supported by Apache Kafka's `OAUTHBEARER` SASL mechanism.
They work on most Kubernetes clusters without requiring additional dependencies such as Keycloak.

The main purpose of Service Account-based authentication is to provide an alternative authentication mechanism when TLS encryption is disabled.

> However, users will be able to use the Service Account-based authentication can be used when TLS is disabled or not.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, users will be able to use the Service Account-based authentication regardless of whether TLS is disabled or not.
```

The default expiration for the tokens will be 3600 seconds, which is the recommended value by Kubernetes.

![Service Account-based authentication](./images/145-configurable-security-of-internal-communication.svg)

Using the Service Account for authentication would introduce stronger dependency on the Kubernetes API.
The tokens have default expiration of 1 hour and typically do not use longer expiration then 24 hours.
So when the Kubernetes API is not available when the token needs to be refreshed, the authentication would fail.
Today, we also rely on the Kubernetes API to load the certificates.
But because they are long-lived, a running Kafka cluster might work for much longer before it is impacted by Kubernetes API server outage.

However, this is acceptable trade-of:
* We are using more secure short-lived credentials which always carry this risk
* I do not think outages when the Kubernetes API server is down but everything else in the Kubernetes cluster is stable and available is rare.
  In many situation, Kubernetes API outages would be accompanied by outages of the worker nodes, Pod restarts, etc.

>   In which case even the operands reliant on mTLS would be affected.

Reviewer 3: If I'm understanding correctly what you intended here I think this sentence should be:
```suggestion
* I think it is rare to have outages when the Kubernetes API server is down but everything else in the Kubernetes cluster is stable.
  In many situation, Kubernetes API outages would be accompanied by outages of the worker nodes, Pod restarts, etc.
  In which case even the operands reliant on mTLS would be affected.
```

Assuming my understanding of the above is correct - What are you basing this assumption on? My understanding is that the API server runs in the control plane, whereas the workloads are in the data plane. And according to the Kubernetes docs typically all control plane components are run on the same machine, whereas the node components run on every node. So to me it seems somewhat likely that clusters might experience control plane problems that do not affect all or some of the nodes. So while I think that it's reasonable to say that this an opt-in feature and therefore users are accepting the risk, using the word "rare" here seems a bit strong to me.

Author: I removed the `rare` word as it is not really quantifiable.

But the Kubernetes control plane is normally highly available in production-grade clusters. So you would normally need to have multiple things happening at the same time in order to have some significant outage. So I do think it is pretty likely it would be accompanied with outages to other components. Keep in mind that we do load the TLS certificates from the Secrets. So any Pod or Container restart while the Kubernetes API is not available would cause issues as well. So you do not need much of additional disruption to have a problem even without the Service Accounts.

  To support Service Account-based authentication, we will add our own custom Jetty handler to verify the Service Account tokens similarly to how the Kafka nodes do.

The Kafka Agent client inside the Cluster Operator will also be extended to support both TLS encryption and mTLS authentication as well as Service Account-based authentication.
It will use the token obtained through the `TokenRequest` API similarly to how the Cluster Operator does when connecting to Kafka.

#### Cruise Control Authentication

Cruise Control will use the Service Account tokens when connecting to the Kafka cluster to collect its metrics.
However, it uses its own API key-based authentication for its HTTP interface.
This will remain unchanged for the time being, and the new cluster configuration will only be used to enable or disable TLS encryption.

In the long term, we should aim to add support for Service Account-based authentication to the Cruise Control HTTP interface as well.
That would also help improve some of the limitations of the current authentication model, such as lack of credential rotation.
However, the Cruise Control community currently seems dysfunctional.

> This should be revisited later depending on the future of Cruise Control.

Reviewer 3: This sentence makes the current state unclear, so suggesting linking to the latest update from the project itself:
```suggestion
However, the [development and maintenance of the Cruise Control project seems to be paused while LinkedIn discusses the potential of donating it to an open source foundation](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/issues/2346#issuecomment-4547334366).
This should be revisited later depending on the future of Cruise Control.
```

Author: As far as I know, the discussions are pretty much stalled and not moving forward at this point. So I prefer to not pull this into the proposal. Either Cruise Control gets this moving forward again at some point. Or we will need to act regardless of this proposal.

Author: (I'm happy to replace the word `dysfunctional` with something more politically correct if that is the point. But I think it describes the current state.)

Reviewer 3: I think saying something like `However, the development and maintenance of the Cruise Control project seems to be paused for the moment.` would suffice if you don't want to link off anywhere

Author: Ok, changed.

### Configuring the Internal Cluster Security

With the ongoing work on cert-manager support, we currently have multiple parallel streams of work related to cluster security that might lead to API changes.
This proposal therefore suggests using only an annotation for now to configure cluster security.
Using an annotation means:
* We are not binding to a specific API layout just yet by adding it to the custom resource spec.
* We indicate that this is an _early access_ feature.

Once both the work on this proposal and the cert-manager integration are complete, we can try to come up with a permanent API.
Given that we just released version 1.0.0 and finalized the `v1` API, we should have enough time to finalize it before the next API version change.

> The cluster security would be configured in the `strimzi.io/cluster-security` annotation.

Reviewer 3: Should this have the word `internal` somewhere? Since my understanding is that this would never be used to replace the existing listener specific configuration we have already, and to me `cluster-security` makes me think of securing external access to the cluster.

Author: It is not intended to replace the current listener configuration. But if we at some point add the CA on/off switch etc., it would be a bit more than just internal cluster security. So I prefer to stick with the current name. The name of the future API, I think that remains up to discussion.

Reviewer 3: My assumption is that if we updated to have the CA on/off switch we would fully define the API, so if we go ahead with the annotations option do we need a name that could be applies more widely?

Author: I'm not sure if it would be that simple. But sure, if it helps to get this approved, I can rename it to `strimzi.io/internal-cluster-security`. Its just an annotation. 🤷
